# new-tricks
This repository contains examples of data science projects I have completed. 

In the Garment Worker Productivity project, I compare a variety of models to predict employee productivity, and find that Random Forest performs best. Through feature selection I discover that when incentives are offered, incentive size correlates with productivity while RMSE decreases from 0.1226 for all instances to 0.0840 for this subset of the dataset. In addition, the model can be simplified substantially, as dropping 16 of 24 features results in an RMSE of 0.0832. These results suggest that expanding the use of incentives may be a strategy worth exploring. For tasks with zero incentive, adding an average incentive increases their mean daily productivity by 13.34%.  I also discovered that productivity may be increased 18% by for longest tasks if they are divided into shorter ones. 

The data for this project is contained in a single file that can be downloaded from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/ishadss/productivity-prediction-of-garment-employees).

In the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) project, I explore this economic relief program and simultaneous changes in national employment by economic sector. After preprocessing the sizeable PPP dataset (11.8 million rows, 50+ columns), I analyzed patterns across 13 different industries in loan features and employment from April 2020 to June 2021. Industries varied greatly both in numbers of employees and loans received, with no clear relationship between the two. Most industries received between 750,000 and 2,000,000 loans. The utilities sector stood out because it received the fewest loans overall and the fewest loans per thousand employees, and it grew the least in employment (less than 1%). Several patterns emerged for every industry. The most common loans were less than 30,000, and as loan size increased above that, the number of loans decreased. Maximum loan size was 1,000,000 USD. Businesses of one to two employees were by far the most common borrowers, and the majority of businesses had fewer than ten employees. Two sectors, leisure and hospitality and manufacturing, had greater proportions of businesses with 20 or more employees. Employment was lowest early in the study and then grew by 2% to 25% for most sectors, with the notable exception of leisure and hospitality which grew 70%. 

Employment outcomes were aggregated into 13 industries, resulting in a very small set of target values. Nevertheless, I wanted to see whether regression models could predict employment growth using number of loans, loan size, and business size as predictors. Not surprisingly, error was very high (lowest Percent RMSE = 51.07%), indicating that any emerging trends are very tentative. If one were tempted to interpret the models, together they suggest that growth in employment may be positively correlated with the number of loans and possibly business size, and be negatively correlated with loan size.

For ease of access, the PPP data files can be downloaded from [my Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1KqJAXW8FDkdEfZJHT3iE5NxYdCCerVDV?usp=sharing) or the [SBA](https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans/covid-19-relief-options/paycheck-protection-program/ppp-data) and the employment data files can be accessed from [this Drive folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1xKxKv9n1uCzRECSJFsvgRW1hQ-UepoSy?usp=sharing) or the [Bureau of Labor Statistics](https://www.bls.gov/charts/employment-situation/employment-levels-by-industry.htm).
